[Editorial] Clarify optionality of multibase prefix (#64)
multiformats/cid: README.md

## Table of Contents

> - [CID (Content IDentifier) Specification](#cid-content-identifier-specification)

Author: Yes, sorry, I had a VSC plug-in that I couldn't find the setting to disable.

Current version: CIDv1

> The atomic CIDv1 is a **binary** format composed from `unsigned_varint`s that encode values from the , each of which :

Reviewer: what does the word "atomic" buy us here?

Reviewer: I'll also take issue with `unsigned_varint` - both its code quoting, and also the `_`; I think this would probably do the job:

```suggestion
The atomic CIDv1 is a **binary** format composed from [unsigned varints](https://github.com/multiformats/unsigned-varint) that encode values from the , each of which :
```

Reviewer: Actually there's a few more problems in this sentence, here's my proposed version:

```suggestion
CIDv1 is a **binary** format composed of [unsigned varints](https://github.com/multiformats/unsigned-varint) prefixing a hash digest to form a self-describing "content address":
```

```text

> <cidv1> ::= <CIDv1-multicodec><content-multicodec><multihash>

Reviewer: "content-multicodec" gets us into tricky territory - we've opted for using the term "multicodec code" to describe the numbers themselves; and specifically here we're talking about an "ipld codec multicodec code"!

I don't really have a better suggestion; but I think we need to explain these terms once introduced, or else we may not be much better off than the current form.

# or, expanded:

> <cidv1> ::= <`0x01`, the multicodec literal for `CIDv1`><multicodec bytecode signaling content type of the data being addressed><multihash of that data>

Reviewer: Oh, I see you're explaining it here

```suggestion
<cidv1> ::= <`0x01`, the multicodec code for `CIDv1`><multicodec code signalling content type of the data being addressed><multihash of that data>
```

I'm mildly uncomfortable with "content type" but maybe that'll have to do without diverging into having to explain the vagaries of IPLD here.

Author: You make a great point that maybe IETF won't love the "content type" analogy, given that the IANA "content types" registry is the canonical example of an IANA registry that the whole web uses for everything, and we should be avoiding the interpretation that all this is just the an alternate stack for a micro-web.  

My addled brain reached for the nearest analogue but what I was *really* trying to do was explain a CID as a turducken or a matrushka: a multibase (or a multibase-NUL if being exported to CBOR-parseable stream) wrapping a CIDv1-tag wrapping any other valid muticodec tag wrapping an innermost payload ("content" if you've parsed all the preceding tags correctly).  But the word "content" is overdetermined here so I should keep trying.

```suggestion
<cidv1> ::= <`0x01`, the multicodec code for `CIDv1`><another multicodec code that identifies the type of the following digest><multihash digest of any unit of data>
```

Or your version if I've overstretched the definition to avoid using the word "content" 😅

- `<multihash-content-address>` is a [multihash](https://github.com/multiformats/multihash) value, which uses a registry of hash function abbreviations to prefix a cryptographic hash of the content being addressed, thus making it self-describing.

## Variant - Stringified Form

Since CIDs have many applications outside of binary-only contexts, a given CID may need to be base-encoded multiple ways for different consumers or for different transports. 
In such applications, CIDs are often expressed as a Unicode *string* rather than a bytestring, which adds a single code-point prefix. 
In these contexts, then, the full string form is:

```text
<cidv1> ::= <multibase-codec><multibase-encoding(<CIDv1-multicodec><content-multicodec><multihash>)>
```

Where

- `<multibase-codec>` is a [multibase](https://github.com/multiformats/multibase) prefix  (1 Unicode codepoint in length) that renders the base-encoded unicode string following it self-describing for simpler conversion back to binary.
 
[internal CID section](#variant-representation---internal-cid) below for context.

## Variant - Legacy Form

> In some binary-only contexts, such as the binary CIDs used as links in the binary data structure [DAG-CBOR](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-cbor/spec/#links)), CIDs are encoded in binary, but with the one-byte "NULL" prefix (0x00) used like an "escape" character to signal to multibase consumers that what follows is NOT to be base-encoded.

Reviewer: I believe dag-cbor is the _only_ place where this is done, and it's handled and stripped out at the codec layer before going anywhere else (i.e. the only code that has to consider this is the dag-cbor codecs themselves, exactly one place per language/implementation). I wonder if it's worth pointing this out and codifying it as an option that people may reach for? It's an interesting quirk of history, but not really something we'd want people reaching for when designing new systems.

Author: good counterpoint.  i think the big-picture question i'm trying to handle here is "how do the interlocking pieces fit together to parse a binary stream that isn't protobuf and isn't CBOR?", so I'm trying to build a pyramid (from lower levels to higher levers) where `unsigned varints` and multicodecs are the base and CIDs are the apex; this is why the specs for seemingly simple things like multibase and multihash are getting weirdly "defensive" and explaining themselves relative to what they're not :D

but @vmx 's point here was that the `identity` prefix is more like a non-multibase prefix, and the "external" binary of CBOR-land has a "don't read me as multibase" envelope, every other external transport/context has a "this is my multibase" envelope, and the "internal" binary contexts of IPFS `unsigned varint`-land do not need either... which was a convincing explanation to me of many quirks I was having trouble conceptualizing (as per the above paragraph!)

Reviewer 2: @bumblefudge I'm sorry to confuse you. I'm on the same page as @rvagg here, he's better at describing it. I really think the Multibase should *not* be part of the CID at all. You would "Multibase encode CIDs", but it's not inherently part of the CID.

In DAG-CBOR, we have this `identity` prefix due to historic reasons (when Multibase was considered part of the CID). But as @rvagg points out, I think it should only be described there and not in the CID spec.

Reviewer 2: I would just remove Variants "legacy form" and "CBOR" compatibility from this spec. I treat the NUL prefix just a CBOR tag 42 specific thing, which is there due to historic reasons (which don't really matter) and won't be changed as we don't want to make a breaking change.

So from a CBOR perspective it's just a CID with a NUL prefix, it doesn't matter that it used to be due to CID being defined differently in the past.

Author: Ah, OK, so the extra NUL isn't required, and a modern non-multibased, non-prefixed CID would get parsed the same way by a standard CBOR parser?

Reviewer 2: > Ah, OK, so the extra NUL isn't required, and a modern non-multibased, non-prefixed CID would get parsed the same way by a standard CBOR parser?

No. CID has nothing to do with CBOR. Perhaps that's the confusion here. Yes, you can encode a CID in CBOR, but you can also encode a CID in MessagePack. The fact that CIDs are encoded in CBOR in a certain way should not be part of the CID spec.

Reviewer 2: > I would also add that the NUL-prefix is still going to be a reserved and explained value in the Multibase spec at IETF, so I'm still struggling to explain its exact syntax and usage. Is this legacy usage from the days of mandatory multibase the only documented usage or are there others I can point to, whether as examples or by way of explanation?

The NUL-prefix isn't specific to CID, I think it's again out of scope for the CID spec. It only matters for the Multibase spec. It's used in case someone wants to have a self-describing binary encoding. The only usage I know is in CBOR CIDs.

Reviewer: Yep, what @vmx said.

We consider this a quirk of history that's been locked in place and won't be changed, but that's only for the dag-cbor codec and doesn't apply anywhere else. My fear is that raising it here lifts it out of dag-cbor and makes it a more generic concern, which it isn't. It should just be something in the dag-cbor spec. The entire section here https://github.com/ipld/ipld/blob/master/specs/codecs/dag-cbor/spec.md#links really should be that last sentence. Essentially: "Hey, this was a historical mistake but it is what it is, CIDs in dag-cbor have an extra `0x00` in front of them, an encoder needs to put one there and a decoder needs to expect one there."

I'm not sure the idea of an "identity" encoding of binary CIDs really helps us at all, at least I haven't seen a case (I think it was originally thought it would be useful when drafting dag-cbor, but we quickly found it was pointless and just wastes a byte).

> I would also add that the NUL-prefix is still going to be a reserved and explained value in the Multibase spec at IETF

Is this necessary beyond just saying `0x00` is a reserved value as a Multibase prefix and shouldn't be used?

Author: ok will refactor along these lines, sorry for the misalignment!

 
[internal CID section](#variant-representation---internal-cid) below for context.

## Variant - Legacy Form

In some binary-only contexts, such as the binary CIDs used as links in the binary data structure [DAG-CBOR](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-cbor/spec/#links)), CIDs are encoded in binary, but with the one-byte "NULL" prefix (0x00) used like an "escape" character to signal to multibase consumers that what follows is NOT to be base-encoded.
Implementers should be careful to detect the presence of this extra byte and remove it before base-encoding to produce a stringified form.

In some contexts, CIDs with this extra "NULL" prefix are referred to as "legacy CIDs" to preserve backwards compatibility with earlier data, generated in systems where the NUL prefix was mandatory in all binary handling.

It is also be useful to note that the for compatibility with CBOR systems, CBOR tag `42` was registered to CIDs in the [CBOR IANA registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/cbor-tags/cbor-tags.xhtml) binary CIDs.

> Both the legacy form with the NULL prefix and the more commonly-used CIDv1 binary form without it conform to the [tag 42 syntax](https://github.com/ipld/cid-cbor/) expected by CBOR consumers.

Author: Haha then we need to PR this line, where it says it MAY!
https://github.com/ipld/cid-cbor/blob/master/README.md?plain=1#L21

Where

> - `<multibase-prefix>` is a [multibase](https://github.com/multiformats/multibase) code (1 Unicode codepoint), to ease encoding CIDs into various bases. **NOTE:** *Binary-only* protocols and transport-limited contexts MAY omit the multibase prefix when the encoding is unambiguous. See the [internal CID section](#variant-representation---internal-cid) below for context.

Author: Heh, I knew it looked wrong as I was writing it but something wouldn't quite click. Thanks for being explicit, I think I've got a new version of the PR that might work now.

For this reason, the multibase "prefix" should ONLY be omitted in binary-only contexts, where base-encoding won't be required and context drift is not a concern.

In these binary-only contexts, such as the binary CIDs used as links in the binary data structure [DAG-CBOR](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-cbor/spec/#links)), CIDs can be stored and consumed as "internal CIDs," i.e. internal to a binary system.
Where such binary-only systems interface with mixed systems, such as exposing internal CIDs to HTTP-based gateways or sending them over text-based transports, an appropriate base-encoding should be chosen and the prefix attached to make them full CIDs, warmly dressed and ready for the outside world.

## Variant Representation - Human Readable CID

It is often advantageous to have a human readable description of a CID, such as for  debugging purposes, unit tests, and documentation. We can easily transform a CID to a "Human Readable CID" by translating and segmenting its constituent parts as follows:

```text
<hr-cid> ::= <hr-mbc> "-" <hr-cid-mc> "-" <hr-mc> "-" <hr-mh>
```
Where each sub-component is replaced with its own human-readable form from the relevant registry:

> - `<hr-mbc>` is the name of the multibase code (eg `z`--> `base58btc`)

Author: incorporated into new commits

# corresponding human readable CID
base58btc - cidv1 - raw - sha2-256-256-6e6ff7950a36187a801613426e858dce686cd7d7e3c0fc42ee0330072d245c95
```
See: https://cid.ipfs.io/#zb2rhe5P4gXftAwvA4eXQ5HJwsER2owDyS9sKaQRRVQPn93bA

## Design Considerations

> CIDs design takes into account many difficult tradeoffs encountered while building [IPFS](https://ipfs.io). These are mostly coming from the multiformats project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CIDs design takes into account many difficult tradeoffs encountered while building [IPFS](https://ipfs.tech). These are mostly coming from the multiformats project.
```

> **Q. Why does CID exist?**

We were using base58btc encoded multihashes in IPFS, and then we needed to switch formats to IPLD. 
We struggled with lots of problems of addressing data with different formats until we created CIDs. 
You can read the history of this format here: https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/130

> **Q. Is the use of multicodec similar to file extensions?**

Yes, kind of! like a file extension, the multicodec identifier establishes the format of the data. 
Unlike file extensions, these are in the middle of the identifier and not meant to be changed by users.
There is also a short table of supported formats.

> **Q. What formats (multicodec codes) does CID support?**

We are figuring this out at this time. 
It will likely be a subset of [multicodecs](https://github.com/multiformats/multicodec/blob/master/table.csv) for secure distributed systems. 

> So far, we want to address IPFS's UnixFS and raw blocks ([`dag-pb`](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-pb/spec/), [`raw`](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.ipld.raw)), IPNS's [`libp2p-key`](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/RFC/0001-text-peerid-cid.md), and IPLD's [`dag-json`](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-json/spec/)/[`dag-cbor`](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-cbor/spec/) formats.

Reviewer 2: I would it's still accurate. I don't think there's full alignment which ones can be used there. I hope that a proper registry for those will help with that.
